* GNU Hyperbole Demonstration and Introduction by Bob Weiner

Welcome to GNU Hyperbole.  Hyperbole will super-charge your GNU Emacs
experience, allowing you to work faster, utilize fewer key bindings, recall
more information and link it all together by learning just a few concepts and
keys.  Invest an hour learning Hyperbole now and save many hours for years to
come.

If you simply want to know what Hyperbole is, see the file "HY-ABOUT".
Hyperbole displays that file when you press {C-h h d a}.  Hyperbole assumes
you know how to use Emacs.  Otherwise, run the Emacs tutorial by pressing
{C-h t} first.

You should be looking at this file within Emacs and Hyperbole should already
be installed within your copy of Emacs.  To be sure, press {C-h h} and you
should see the Hyperbole menu in your minibuffer window at the bottom of
your current Emacs frame.  Press {q} to quit out of this menu and we can
begin.  If Hyperbole is not installed, see the "INSTALL" file, in the
same directory as this file, for instructions on installing it.

This demo illustrates simple usage of the basic Hyperbole button-action types
and shows how Hyperbole can support a style of self-documenting, interactive
files.  See the glossary in the Hyperbole Manual, "(hyperbole)Glossary", if
terms used here are unfamiliar to you.


* Smart Keys 

Hyperbole provides two context-sensitive keys, the Action Key and the
Assist Key, jointly referred to as Smart Keys that each do dozens of
things, essentially whatever is most helpful in any given textual
context where they are pressed.  The Action Key is {M-RET} (ESC RETURN
if you are unsure) on the keyboard and the shift-middle mouse button
on a 3-button mouse or the shift-left button on a two button mouse.  The
Assist Key is {C-u M-RET} and the shift-right mouse button. Memorize
these keys; you will use them a lot.  To distinguish the mouse buttons
from the keyboard keys, we will often refer to the Action Mouse Key or
Assist Mouse Key.

The Action Key selects entities, creates links and activates buttons.
The Assist Key provides help, such as reporting on a button's
attributes, or serves a complementary function to whatever the Action
Key does within a context.  Press the Action Key within this
<(button)> to see all of the contexts and operations of the Smart
Keys.  SPACE scrolls forward and backwards DELETE scrolls backward
within the Smart Key summary; {q} quits and returns here.

See also the later section, <(Smart Mouse Keys)>.

Now let's look at many of the things you can do with the Smart Keys.

** Smart Scrolling

By default, the variable `smart-scroll-proportional' is set to t (TRUE).  This
makes a press of the Action Key at the end of a line scroll forward, so that
the current line is placed at the top of the window; the Assist Key does the
reverse when pressed at the end of line; it places the current line at the
bottom of the window.  This is called proportional scrolling because the
amount of scrolling is relative to the point's position in the window.  Try
it with this DEMO buffer to see how you can precisely control what is displayed
in a window and then come back here.

Alternatively, if this variable is set to nil (FALSE), the Smart Keys scroll
forward or backward a windowful when at the end of a line, regardless of
which line point is on, just as {C-v} and {M-v} do.

Let's try windowful scrolling a bit.  Press the Action Key within the
following button and then practice scrolling: <(toggle-scroll-proportional)>.
If you prefer the default proportional scrolling, click on the previous
button again to restore it.

If you always want windowful (non-proportional) scrolling, you'll have to
add a setting of smart-scroll-proportional to your "~/.emacs" file after the
point at which you load Hyperbole or else set it as part of
hyperbole-init-hook, which executes whenever Hyperbole is loaded, e.g.:

   (add-to-list 'hyperbole-init-hook
     		(lambda () (setq smart-scroll-proportional nil)))

** Hyperbole Menus

Once Hyperbole is loaded into your Emacs, a Hyperbole menu will be added to
the Emacs menubar, if you have one.  This menu is mostly the same as the
minibuffer menu you saw at the beginning; one is for use from the keyboard
(the minibuffer menu) and one is for use with the mouse (the menubar menu).

In this demo, we will use the minibuffer menu.  To display the top-level
Hyperbole menu again use {C-h h} or click the Action Mouse Key within the
blank/inactive minibuffer window.  You will see a single line (possibly
wrapped around) with submenus that end with a forward slash (/) and non-menu
items.  Type the first letter of any menu item (upper or lower case does not
matter) or click on it with the Action Mouse Key to select and activate it.
You may also move forward an item with {TAB} or {M-f} or backward an item
with {Shift-TAB} or {M-b} and then use {RET} to select the item.

A press of {q} or {C-g} will quit from the current menu without invoking any
commands.  A press/click of the Assist Key on a menu item pops up a window
displaying help for it while keeping the current menu on screen.  {C-t} or
an Action Key press/click on the menu prefix (before the '>' character)
returns you to the top Hyperbole menu if you are in a submenu.

Let's try a menu item that displays the Hyperbole Glossary of terms.  Use
{q} in the glossary to return here.  Use {C-h h d g} to display the
glossary.  {C-h h d RET} would simply exit the menu and {C-h h d C-t} would
redisplay the top Hyperbole menu.

What if we want to do a web search for GNU Hyperbole?  Then we use the
Find/Web menu, typically bound to {C-c /} or if not, then use {C-h h f w}.
Then type {g} for Google and enter "GNU Hyperbole", including the quote marks
so that it is searched for as a phrase.  Your standard web browser will be
used to return the search results.

You can change which browser is used with {C-h h c w}, the Cust/Web-Search
menu.  Advanced users can change the search engines listed by editing the
option, <(hyperbole-web-search-alist)>.

** Help Buffers

Since the Smart Keys do so many things, it is helpful to see what they will
do in any given context before pressing them, especially when you are first
learning Hyperbole.  {C-h A} shows you what the Action Key will do in the
current context; {C-u C-h A} displays the same kind of help for the Assist
Key.  Only a capital A will work, so be sure to press shift.  Try these
help commands.

Any buffer whose name ends in `Help*' is presumed to be a temporary buffer
that you want to inspect and then remove from view.  If you press either the
Action or Assist Key at the end of a help buffer, the buffer is buried from
view and your window configuration is restored to its state prior to
displaying the help (same as what {q} does).  If you have removed the Smart
Key help buffer, bring it back.  Then press one of the Smart Keys at its end
to remove it.  Note how your window configuration is restored.

Remember that this works for any help buffer, whether or not Hyperbole
generated it.


* Koutliner

A unique feature of Hyperbole for those who like to outline thoughts and be
able to easily identify each outline entry and hyperlink to it is the
Koutliner.

The Hyperbole Koutliner should work under any modern version of GNU Emacs.
Your Emacs supports the Koutliner if when you press {C-h h} to display the
Hyperbole menu, you have a Kotl/ entry in the menu.

The Hyperbole Koutliner produces structured, autonumbered documents composed
of hierarchies of cells.  Each cell has two identifiers, a relative
autonumber indicating its present position within the outline and a permanent
identifier suitable for use within hyperlink references to the cell.

The Kotl/Example menu entry on {C-h h k e} gives you an editable copy of
Hyperbole's example Koutliner file.  This explains the Koutliner commands
and lets you try them out as you learn.  Additional documentation can be
found in "(hyperbole)Koutliner".  "(hyperbole)Koutliner Keys" summarizes in
alphabetical order the Koutliner commands which are bound to keys.


* HyControl

Hyperbole includes the fastest, easiest-to-use Emacs window and frame
management system available, HyControl, found under the Hyperbole Screen
menu.  If you use a lot of Emacs windows or frames (typically, window system
windows) then this tool is for you.  A long video demonstrating most of
HyControl's features is available at https://youtu.be/M3-aMh1ccJk.

HyControl interactively adjusts the layout of your windows and frames
down to the pixel-level if desired.  You adjust the location, size and
display elements of your windows and frames until they look as you like
and then simply quit HyControl and go back to work.  It has smart features to
avoid covering toolbars anchored at the edges of your screen and allows you
to quickly set numeric arguments to apply to operations, like resizing a
frame to a percentage of your screen size.

Hyperbole binds {C-c \} to invoke HyControl window control; otherwise, the
Hyperbole minibuffer menu item, Screen/WindowsControl {C-h h s w}, will do
the same thing.

Once in HyControl, your minibuffer window at the bottom of the selected frame
will display a summary of keys you may use to adjust your windows until you
press {q} to quit from HyControl.  The key, {t}, will always switch you
between controlling frames and windows, the "submodes" of HyControl, with the
upper left of the minibuffer prompt showing which type of control is active.

See "(hyperbole)HyControl" for full usage information.


* History

Hyperbole provides a history command that returns you to previous button
locations in the reverse order of the way you traverse them.  It actually
restores your complete frame and window configuration at the time of the
button press.  You access it by selecting the Hist command from the top-level
Hyperbole menu, {C-h h h}.  Remember this because you will want to use that
command to return to this DEMO later.


* Implicit Buttons

An incredibly powerful feature of Hyperbole is known as implicit buttons,
i.e. a specific format of text within a buffer that Hyperbole recognizes as a
button and lets you activate.  Hyperbole recognizes these by context and does
require much of any specialized markup.

Note that you must press a Smart Key on the first line of an implicit button
to utilize it if it spans multiple lines and always press on a regular
character, not a delimiter like ( or ) since these are treated specially and
used to select groups of text.

Hyperbole has many built-in implicit button types, a number of which you will
see here, and allows you to create your own.  Once a type is known, you can
embed an infinite number of buttons of that type within your text simply by
typing them.  Let's look at some of these buttontypes and how you can use
them.

** Key Sequence Buttons

Any Emacs key sequence delimited with curly braces is an implicit button.
Press the Action Key with {C-u C-p} for example and the point should move
four lines upward.  An Assist Key press on the key sequence displays the
documentation for its command binding, i.e. what it does.  If it does not
represent a bound key sequence, it will not be treated as a key sequence
button.

Hyperbole minibuffer menu items may also be activated as key sequences.  For
example, {C-h h d i} displays the online browsable Info version of the
Hyperbole Manual.  Press your Action Key between the braces to see it.  Once
in the Info browser, use {s} to search for any topic throughout the manual.

Now when you write notes about particular global key sequences you want to
remember, just surround them with curly braces and you'll always be able to
try them out with a simple click or press.  You can even create your own
demonstrations and tours with this and other implicit button types.

** Org mode

For users of Emacs Org mode, Hyperbole does two basic things.  First, the
Action Key will follow and execute links in Org mode files.  Second, when
point is on an outline heading in Org mode, the Action Key cycles the view
of the subtree at point and the Assist Key cycles the view of all headings
in the buffer.  The Assist Key will also display help when pressed on an Org
mode link.

** Implicit Path Links

Any existing absolute or relative pathname (whether doubly quoted or not)
acts as an implicit button that either displays the referenced path within a
buffer, passes it to an external viewer program, or runs a function that
operates upon the path.  These are `pathname' implicit buttons.  For example,
activate "HY-ABOUT".  HY-ABOUT or `HY-ABOUT' would work as well or
"~/.emacs".

*** Paths with Line and Column Numbers

If you want to display a path at a specific line number and optionally column
number, then add each number preceded by a colon at the end of the path.
For example, "HY-ABOUT:10" displays HY-ABOUT at line 10, the second
paragraph, with point at the start of the line.  "HY-ABOUT:18:7" shows the
first numbered item on line 18 at column 7, where the text starts.

*** HTML and Markdown Hash Links

Often links to HTML and Markdown files use a hash mark (#) plus an identifier
to refer to a section of such files.  When the Action Key is pressed on any
such reference, it jumps to the section referenced by the link.

For example, "man/hyperbole.html#Smart-Keys" will take you to the Smart Keys
description in the HTML version of the Hyperbole manual.  Inside that manual
in HTML form, "#Smart-Keys" would do the same thing.  Similarly,
"README.md#why-was-hyperbole-developed" jumps to the referenced section of
that Markdown file, while accounting for the difference in case, whitespace
and trailing punctuation between the identifier and the section header.
(Inline Markdown links surrounded by parentheses and square bracketed
reference links work similarly but are handled specifically as Markdown
links, not as pathnames).

*** Path Suffixes and Variables

Most file path buttons directly name their associated files in full, but
Hyperbole can also add file name suffixes and resolve Emacs and environment
variables within path buttons.  If you have the source code for your Emacs
installation, then there is a Lisp library, simple.el.gz, stored in
compressed form within a directory listed in the variable, load-path.  An
Action Key click on "${load-path}/simple.el" will dynamically locate the file
within load-path, uncompress it and display it for editing.  There is no need
to know whether the file is compressed or not or what values are set for
load-path at your particular location.  Thus, you can provide path links that
vary from site to site, especially handy if you email Hyperbole buttons to
your associates.  Shell environment variables also work.  To see your home
directory, try "${HOME}".  Press the Action Key within "(hyperbole)Link
Variable Substitution" for a bit more on this topic.

For the special cases of Emacs Lisp files and Info manual files, you don't
even need to give the variable of directories to search since Hyperbole knows
them already.  Thus an Action Key press on "simple.el", "hyperbole.info"
or even "(hyperbole)" will display these properly as well.

Some file types require external programs to view them, such as pdf files.
The function (hpath:get-external-display-alist) determines the file
suffixes which should be viewed externally together with their associated
viewer programs, on a per-frame, per window-system basis.  See its
documentation for more details.  The association lists used by this
function are stored in variables for each available window system:
hpath:external-display-alist-macos, hpath:external-display-alist-mswindows,
and hpath:external-display-alist-x.  Examine and modify these
values to suit your needs.

Under the X WINDOW SYSTEM, if you have the `xv' program, all of the
following file formats may be displayed as images: gif, tiff, xbm, pm, pbm,
and jpeg.  Under X or Mac OS, try a press of the Action Key on
"man/hyperbole.pdf" to browse the printable version of the Hyperbole
Manual.

*** Path Prefixes

Several prefix characters may be attached to pathnames to indicate that a
different action should be taken when the button is activated.  An
exclamation point prefix indicates that the full pathname should be run as a
non-windowed shell program.  For example, try "!/bin/date" on UNIX.  This
will run the program in a subshell within Emacs.  An ampersand prefix means
run the full pathname as a windowed program, outside of Emacs.  Under the X
window system, try "&/usr/X11/bin/xeyes".  Finally, a hyphen indicates that
the filename should be executed as an Emacs Lisp library,
e.g. "-hibtypes.elc", rather than displayed.

*** Info Paths

Double quoted GNU Info manual references of the form "(filename)refname"
work as implicit buttons that display the associated referent in the Emacs Info
Browser.  Thus, Action Key presses on "(hyperbole)Glossary" or "(emacs)Glossary",
take you right there.  Typically, you exclude any path and file suffix from
the filename.

Refname can be an Info node name or any Info index item (an item listed in
any of a manual's indices).  Index items let you jump to a specific,
referenced point within an Info node.  As an example, suppose you want
quick access to a summary of Hyperbole's key bindings.  Store
"(hyperbole)key binding list" in your personal file of buttons (accessed with
{C-h h b p}) and it will always be there.  Press the Action Key on it and
try it.  Press the Action Key on the key binding of your personal button
file and then store the implicit link there if you like.

If you want to learn a rapid way to create explicit buttons, see "(hyperbole)By
Dragging".

Since Emacs and most GNU programs include Info manuals, you now a simple way to
link to and jump to any marked item within any manual.  Pathname implicit buttons
provide one example of how Hyperbole can improve your working environment without
requiring any work from you.

*** Remote Paths

If you use the standard Emacs library "tramp.el" for working with remote
files and directories, then remote pathnames of the form:

	  /user@host.domain:/path

will be recognized by Hyperbole.

Once you have Tramp configured for loading and are on the Internet, you can
click on any of the following to browse the contents of the Hyperbole
distribution:

        "/anonymous@ftp.gnu.org:/pub/gnu/hyperbole/"
	 ftp.gnu.org:/pub/gnu/hyperbole/

You can see that for Tramp pathnames, Hyperbole recognizes them with or
without the double quote delimiters.

If you enable the Hyperbole option to use URLs when finding files with
the {C-x C-f} (find-file) command via the {C-h h c f} key sequence, then
you can also use paths of the form:

	 ftp://ftp.gnu.org/pub/

** Internet Request For Comments (RFC) Document Browsing

With Tramp, you can also retrieve and browse RFC documents used in Internet
standard-making.  Simply use the Action Key on an RFC document identifier,
like RFC-822 or rfc 822, and the RFC will be retrieved and displayed for
browsing.  The `rfc' implicit button type provides this service.  The
`hpath:rfc' variable specifies the location from which to retrieve RFCs.

Once you have retrieved an RFC, an Action Key press most anywhere within a
line typically will produce a table of contents summary of the RFC (via the
`rfc-toc' implicit button type).  An Action Key press on any of the table of
contents lines then displays that section, for easy sectional browsing.

** MANIFEST Files and Tables of Contents

Now suppose you want to browse through a number of files within the Hyperbole
distribution.  You could use the Emacs dired subsystem, "(emacs)Dired", but a
faster way is to note that files named MANIFEST and DIR are used to summarize
the files in a directory, so we can use each of their entries as an implicit
button (of type `dir-summary') to take us to the file.

Let's look at "MANIFEST".  Now click anywhere within a line in the MANIFEST
file and you see that it is displayed as expected.  (Remember to use the
Hyperbole history command to return here.)  You can get help on these buttons
just like any others.

In README files, such as Hyperbole's "README", table of contents entries
act similarly.  Click on "README" to view that file and then click on a
table of contents entry to jump to the associated section in the "README"
file.

** World Wide Web URL Buttons

You can browse URLs (universal resource locators) from within any buffer once
Hyperbole is loaded.  Hyperbole's Cust (Customization) menu allows you to set
the web browser used for display (this is turn sets the standard Emacs
"browse-url.el" library settings).

Try using the Action Key on:  "http://www.gnu.org".

Full and abbreviated web and ftp URLs, e.g. www.gnu.org, are recognized with
or without quotes.

** Email Addresses

An Action Key press on an email address of any common domain name will start
composing an email message to that name within Emacs.  This is limited to
major modes listed in the variable, mail-address-mode-list.  Try composing a
message to <hyperbole-users@gnu.org> and tell us what you think of Hyperbole.
Even better, a press of or on {C-h h m c} composes mail to the list that
includes your system information.

** Social Media Hashtags and Usernames

An Action Key press a social media hashtag or username reference at point
displays the web page associated with the reference at the associated
service.  References are of the form:
[facebook|instagram|twitter]?[#@]<hashtag-or-username> or
[fb|in|tw]?[#@]<hashtag-or-username>.  If no service is given, it defaults to
the value of @code{hibtypes-social-default-service} which is initially
"twitter".

So all of the following make the same hashtag reference: #gnu twitter#gnu
tw#gnu and display the page for tweets with that hashtag.  Similarly,
in@lostart or instagram@lostart would display the page for the user lostart
at instagram.  Try pressing the Action Key on these if you like.

The file "hib-social.el" has more details on this.

** Grep, Occurrence, Debugger and Compiler Error Buttons, and Cscope Analyzer
   Lines

The output of `grep -n', the UNIX line pattern matcher, can be activated as
buttons that jump to each matched line within its source file; use {M-x grep
RET} or even better, the Hyperbole recursive directory grep, {C-h h f g}.

Compiler error messages also serve as implicit buttons that jump to
associated source lines; use {M-x compile RET}.  GDB, DBX or XDB stack frames
along with GDB breakpoint listing lines also link to source lines.

{C-h h f o} or {M-x occur RET} (find matches in a single buffer) and {C-h h f
m} or {M-x moccur RET} (find matches across multiple buffers and files) also
produce implicit button output that displays associated source lines.

If you have the Cscope C/C++ code analyzer from the AT&T Toolchest and have
loaded the cscope.el library add-on for GNU Emacs, then the output lines
from a cscope query serve as implicit buttons which jump to associated
source lines.  Cscope goes beyond the basic Emacs tags facility to allow you
to see the callers of a function and the functions called by a specific
routine.

Many of these `find a line' features exist in the Hyperbole Find/ menu.  Give
it a try, e.g. to filter a file to just lines that don't match a pattern.

** Annotated Bibliography Buttons

Here's a use of an annotated bibliography reference implicit button which
allows you to see a bibliography entry such as [FSF 16] when you activate the
button between brackets.

** Completion Selection

Often when Emacs or Hyperbole prompts for an argument in the minibuffer, a
list of possible argument completions is available by pressing {?}.  A single
Action Key press on any of these completions inserts it into the minibuffer
for your inspection.  A second press on the same completion causes it to be
used as the argument value and any succeeding argument prompt is then
displayed.  Test this technique with a {C-x C-f} (find-file) and then a {?}.

** Hyperbole Source Buttons

If you ask for help with the Assist Key or {C-u C-h A} from within the [FSF
16] button, the first line of the help buffer will look like this:

@loc> "DEMO"

except it will contain the full pathname of the file.  If the button were
embedded within a buffer without an attached file, the first line of the help
buffer might look like:

@loc> #<buffer *scratch*>

If you click the Action Key on the buffer name, the buffer will be displayed
just as a file buffer would.  This type of implicit button is called a
`hyp-source' button.

You can also activate any explicit buttons shown in help buffers thanks to
hyp-source buttons.

** UNIX Man Apropos Buttons

Below are some lines output by the UNIX `apropos' command (with a little
touchup for display purposes).  A button activation anywhere within such a
line recognizes the line as an apropos entry and displays the man page for
the entry.  Try it.

grep, egrep, fgrep (1) - search a file for a string or regular expression
rm (1)                 - remove (unlink) files or directories
touch (1)              - update the access and modification times of a file
cat (1)                - concatenate and display 

** Site-specific Online Library Document IDs

Hyperbole offers a powerful, yet easy to use facility for building online
libraries through the use of the `doc-id' implicit button type.  A document
id is used just like a reference citation in traditional publications but it
actually links to the document that it references and the card catalog
(index) entry for the document.  One can easily pass around doc ids to point
people to appropriate documents.  For example, a mail message in response to
a question might say, "See [Emacs-001] for examples of what Emacs can do."

Since the format and handling of document identifiers and their index
entries is site-specific, document id handling is not completely configured
in a default Hyperbole configuration.  If you wish to setup this facility
for site or personal use, see the DESCRIPTION section in "hib-doc-id.el" for
installation and use information.


* Explicit Buttons

Beyond implicit buttons recognized in-context by Hyperbole, Hyperbole also
offers `explicit buttons' that you create and embed within documents.  As you
have seen, explicit buttons look like this `<(fake button)>'.  They are
quickly recognizable, yet relatively non-distracting as one scans the text in
which they are embedded.  Explicit buttons can link to local and remote files
or to a section within a document; they can calculate things or query
databases or show different views of bodies of information.  Unlike HTML
hyperbuttons, there is no markup language to learn nor specific document
format required.  You can create explicit buttons with simple keyboard
presses or mouse drags from one window to another.

This button prints the <(factorial)> of 5 in the minibuffer when activated
with the Action Key.  If you instead press the Assist Key, you get help for
the preceding button.  The help offered is a summary report of the button.
You will see that it utilizes the `eval-elisp' action type.  You can also see
who created it.  Try it.  {q} will quit the summary report display.

Note that the create-time and mod-time are displayed using your own timezone
but they are stored as universal times.  So if you work with people at other
sites, you can mix their buttons with your own within the same document and
see one unified view of the modification times on each button.

Every explicit button utilizes an `action type', many of which are predefined
by Hyperbole.  {C-h h e t RET} lists all action types available to you when
creating explicit buttons and specifying their types.

Hyperbole is pretty forgiving about the format of explicit buttons.  For
example, all of the following represent the same button, as long as you press
on the *first* line of the button, within the button delimiters:

  <(factorial button)>

  <( factorial      button)>

  Pam>  <(factorial
  Pam>    button)>

  ;; <(factorial
  ;;   button)>

  /* <( factorial      */
  /*    button )> */


** Creating and Modifying Explicit Buttons

Creating explicit buttons is fun and easy.  You can always try them out
immediately after creating them or can utilize the Assist Key to verify what
buttons do.  There are two ways to create them: by dragging between windows
with the Action Mouse Key or by using the Hyperbole menus.

*** Creation via Dragging

The most efficient way to create an explicit button interactively is to use
the Action Mouse Key to drag from a button source window to a window showing
its link referent.  More specifically, you should split your current Emacs
frame into two windows: one which contains the point at which you want a
button to be inserted and another which shows the point to which you want to
link.  Depress the Action Mouse Key at the source point for the button
(anywhere but on a paired delimiter such as double quotes or parentheses).
Then drag to the other window and release the Action Mouse Key at the start
point of the link referent.  The process becomes quite simple with a little
practice.

Hyperbole uses the link referent context to determine the type of link
to make.  If there are a few different types of links which are
applicable from the context, you will be prompted with a list of the
types.  Simply use the Action Key or the first letter of the link
type to select one of the type names and to finish the link creation.
Hyperbole will then insert explicit button delimiters around the button
label and will display a message in the minibuffer indicating both the
button name and its action/link type.

When a link is created, if its path contains a match for any of the variable
values listed in hpath:variables, then the variable's name surrounded by ${
} delimiters is substituted for the literal value.  Hyperbole then replaces
the variable with a matching value when the link is later resolved.  This
allows the sharing of links over wide areas, where links contain variables
whose values differ between link creator and link activator.

*** Creation via Menu

You may instead use the Hyperbole menus to create explicit buttons.  First,
mark/highlight a short region of text in any fashion allowed by Emacs and
then select the Hyperbole menu item sequence, Ebut/Create {C-h h e c}.  You
will be prompted for the button's label with the marked region as the
default.  If you accept the default and enter the rest of the information you
are prompted for, the button will be created within the current buffer and
Hyperbole will surround the marked region with explicit button delimiters to
indicate success.

If you do not mark a region before invoking the button create command, you
will be prompted for both a label and a target buffer for the button and the
delimited label text will be inserted into the target buffer after a
successful button creation.

After Hyperbole has the button label and its target buffer, it will prompt
you for an action type for the button.  Use the {?} completion list key to
see the available types.  The type selected determines any following values
for which you are prompted.

If a previous button with the same label exists in the same buffer, Hyperbole
will add an instance number to the label when it adds the delimiters so that
the name is unique.  Thus, you don't have to worry about accidental button
name conflicts.  If you want the same button to appear in multiple places
within the buffer, just copy and paste the button with its delimiters.
Hyperbole will interpret all occurrences of the same delimited label within a
buffer as the same button.

If you create link buttons using the Hyperbole menus, the best technique is
to place on screen both the source buffer for the button and the buffer to
which it will link.  Mark the region of text to use as your button label,
invoke the button create command from the menu, choose an action type which
begins with `link-to-' and then use the direct selection techniques mentioned
in "(hyperbole)Smart Key Argument Selection", to select the link referent.

See "(hyperbole)Utilizing Explicit Buttons" for much more detail on how to
work with explicit buttons.

** Sample Explicit Buttons and Types

Below we demonstrate some uses and types of explicit buttons.

Activation of the next button will tell you about <(keyboard macros)>.  Can't
remember a Hyperbole term?  Check out the Hyperbole Manual <(glossary)>.

Here is a <(keyboard macro)> button.  It displays documentation for the
first Emacs Lisp function that follows it, e.g. (hbut:report).  You can see
that a button label can consist of a number of words, up to a set <(maximum
length)>.

A <(shell command)> button can do many things, such as display the length of
this file.  While such commands are executing, you can perform other
operations.  If you create a button that runs a shell command which displays
its own window system window, i.e. a window outside of Emacs, use
`exec-window-cmd' rather than `exec-shell-cmd' as its action type.

You can link to files such as your <(.emacs)> file.  Or directories, like
the <(tmp directory)>.  When creating file links, if the file you are
linking to is loaded in a buffer, you are prompted as to whether you want
the link to jump to the present point in that buffer.  If so, the link will
always jump there, so position point within the referent file to take
advantage of this feature.  Note how a separate window is used when you
activate file link buttons.  Most basic Hyperbole action types display their
results in this manner.

You can make a button an alias for another by using the `link-to-ebut'
action type.  This <(factorial alias)> button does whatever the earlier
<(factorial)> button does.

The `link-to-mail' action type allows you to reference mail messages that
you have stored away.  We can't demonstrate it here since we don't have the
mail messages that you do.

Hyperbole buttons may also be embedded within mail messages.  Even buttons
copied into mail replies can work:

    Emile said:
    >
    > Hyperbole is better than home baked bread but not as filling.
    > The following sample button displays a message, <(as long as 
    > you click within its first line)>.

Please note that support for explicit Hyperbole buttons within mail and
USENET news messages has not yet been updated for use with Emacs 24 and 25,
so these features are disabled by default.  If you want to try them knowing
this, {C-h h c m} will toggle this feature on and off.

* Smart Mouse Keys

If you use Emacs with mouse support under the OS X window system, the X
Window System or MS Windows, Hyperbole automatically configures your mouse
keys for use as Smart Keys and provides additional display-oriented
operations as demonstrated here.

See the Hyperbole menu item, Doc/SmartKeys {C-h h d s}, for a summary of
all Smart Key operations.  For extensive details on Smart Key operation,
see the Hyperbole manual section, "(hyperbole)Smart Key Reference".

If you ever want to restore the mouse bindings that existed before Hyperbole
was loaded, use the `hmouse-toggle-bindings' command.  It switches between
the Hyperbole mouse key bindings and those set prior to loading Hyperbole
and then back again if invoked once more.  There is no default key binding
for this command, so you must use `M-x hmouse-toggle-bindings RET'.
Alternatively, you may select a key and bind it as part of any setting of
`hyperbole-init-hook' within your personal .emacs file.

For example:
  (add-hook 'hyperbole-init-hook
   (lambda () (global-set-key <YOUR-KEY-HERE> 'hmouse-toggle-bindings)))

** Thing Selection

Hyperbole has some radically cool ways to select regions of structured text
or source code and to copy or move them between buffers with a single mouse
drag or two key presses.  A great deal of smarts are built-in so that it
does the right thing most of the time.

We use the term things to refer to structured entities that Hyperbole can
select.  These include: delimited pairs of (), {}, <>, [] and quote marks,
source code functions, source code comments and matching tag pairs in HTML
and SGML modes.  Delimited things are those things that contain a
selectable delimiter such as an opening parenthesis.

The best way to mark a delimited thing is to move your cursor to the
starting delimiter of the thing and then press the Action Key.  Typically,
you will see the thing highlight.  You can then operate upon it as you
would any Emacs region.  An Action Key press on the start of an HTML or
SGML tag pair marks the entire region span of the pair.  If you use the
Assist Key instead, it will mark and kill (delete) the thing.

Even better are Smart Mouse Key drags which let you copy or move delimited
things in one operation without even highlighting them.  To copy, simply
drag with the Action Key from a thing's opening delimiter and release
somewhere outside of the thing, either within the same window or within
another window.  The thing will be copied to the point of release.  If you
want to move a thing, simply perform the same drag but with the Assist
Mouse Key.  Ensure that you do not move any explicit buttons from one
buffer to another as that does not presently work.

Try out some of these operations in HTML or source code files to see
how they can speed your editing.

Hyperbole also binds two convenience keys for working with things.

{C-c RET} selects bigger and bigger syntactic regions with each successive
use.  Double or triple clicks of the Selection Key (left mouse key) do the
same thing.  The first press selects a region based upon the character at
point.  For example, with point over an opening or closing grouping
character, such as { or }, the whole grouping is selected, e.g. a C
function.  When on an _ or - within a programming language variable name,
the whole name is selected.  The type of selection is displayed in the
minibuffer as feedback.  When using a language based mainly on indenting,
like Bourne shell, a double click on the first alpha character of a line,
such as an if statement, selects the whole statement.  Use {C-g} to unmark
the region when done.

The second convenience key is bound only in HTML/web mode.  {C-c .} jumps
between the opening and closing tag of a pair.  It moves point to the start
of the tag paired with the closest tag that point is within or which it
precedes.  A second press moves point to the matching tag of the pair,
allowing you to quickly jump back and forth between opening and closing
tags.

** Context-sensitive Help

Since the Smart Keys perform different operations in different contexts, it
is important to have context-sensitive help available.  The earlier section
on Help Buffers explained how to display such help from the keyboard.  The
same help can be displayed using the mouse by depressing the Smart Key for
which you want help, performing any action necessary to register a context,
such as a drag motion, and then pressing the other Smart Key.

Here is an example.  Depress the Action Key somewhere within this paragraph
and while holding it down, depress the Assist Key.  Then release the keys in
any order and the help display will pop up.  It explains the context in
which the Action Key was pressed and what it does in that context.  Try it.
Basically, you just depress the Smart Mouse Key you want help for and while
holding it down, depress the other Smart Mouse Key to get help.  If you use
the mouse a lot, this is a great key combination to master as it will let
you explore the many different contextual actions that Hyperbole offers
without having to trigger any of them.

** Creating and Deleting Windows

Horizontal and vertical drags of the Smart Mouse Keys are used to split and
to delete Emacs windows.

An Action Mouse Key horizontal drag of five or more characters in either
direction within a single window creates a new window by splitting the
current window into two windows, one on top of the other.  An Action Mouse
Key vertical drag in either direction splits the current window into two
side-by-side windows.  A horizontal or vertical drag of the Assist Mouse Key
within a single window, deletes that window.

Let's try these.  You need only move your mouse pointer a few characters to
register a drag.  First, split this window with an Action Key horizontal
drag.  Then click the Action Key in the first few characters of the modeline
of one of the windows to change the buffer that it displays so you can tell
the windows apart.  Then delete either one of the windows with a horizontal
drag of the Assist Key within the window.  If you split windows many times
and then delete a number of the windows, you'll be left with windows of
differing heights.  Use {C-x +} to re-balance the heights of the remaining
windows, so they are fairly even.

Now try a side-by-side window split.  Drag vertically with the Action Key by
three or more lines to split the window.  Again, change the buffer of one of
the windows.  Then use a vertical Assist Key drag within either one of the
side-by-side windows to delete it.

** Resizing Windows

You can easily resize Emacs windows by dragging their window separators
(modelines or vertical side lines) within a frame.  Simply depress either
Smart Key on a modeline or near a window side, hold it down while you drag
to a new location and then release.  The window separator will then jump to
the location of release.  Basically, just drag the window separator to where
you want it.  Nowadays a better version of stacked window resizing exists on
the left mouse key.  A drag from a blank area of a modeline with this key
shows visible feedback as the window is resized.

Did you follow all that?  Let's try it to be sure.  First, you need at least
two windows, so create a new one with the drag techniques you just learned.
Now drag with either Smart Key from the shared window edge to a new location.
See how both windows change size?  For side-by-side windows, you drag from
just to the left of any window border controls and drag within this same
window.

Try to drag the bottom modeline.  You see that you can't; you would have to
resize the frame to move the bottom up.

** Swapping Buffers

Swapping buffer locations is quick and easy with Hyperbole.  Simply drag from
one window to another with the Assist Key (remember the Action Key creates
buttons when you use the same drag).

Split the current window into two, one above the other.  Drag the upper
modeline so that one window is clearly bigger than the other.

Then use this Hyperbole minibuffer menu key sequence to swap the buffers and
quit from the menu: {C-h h s w ~ q}.

** Saving and Restoring Window Configurations

A window configuration consists of the set of windows within a single Emacs
frame.  This includes their locations, buffers, and scrolled positions of
their buffers.

Hyperbole allows you to save and restore window configurations with simple
diagonal mouse drags within a single window.  A diagonal drag in any
direction of the Action Key saves the current window configuration to a ring
of window configurations, just like the Emacs text kill ring.  (See
"(Emacs)Kill Ring".)  Each diagonal drag in any direction of the Assist Key
restores a prior saved window configuration from the ring.  Window
configurations are restored in reverse order of the way they were saved.
Since a ring is circular, after the oldest element is restored, the newest
element will again be restored and so on.

If these operations are unclear to you, just forget about them and move on.
They are not necessary to enjoy the rest of Hyperbole.  Otherwise, give them
a try by creating various window configurations and then saving and
restoring them.

** Modeline Mouse Clicks

Smart Mouse Key clicks on window modelines are treated specially by
Hyperbole.  They are broken up into three regions, each with their own Smart
Mouse Key operations.  The regions are: the left edge, the right edge, and
the blank middle portion (the non-edge part of the modeline).  The edge
regions are the left or rightmost three characters of the modeline, by
default.

*** Switching to Another Buffer

An Action Key click in the left edge of a modeline buries the current buffer,
i.e. puts it on the bottom of the buffer list and removes it from view, if it
is not the only available buffer.  An Assist Key click in the left edge of a
modeline unburies the bottom buffer.  Repeated clicks of either key allow you
to cycle through buffers to get to the one you want.  Try this out.

*** Displaying Documentation

An Action Key click in the right edge of a modeline displays the Info manual
browsing system, see "(info)".  Once in Info, you can click with your Action
Key to follow menu items, cross references, or to jump to Info nodes
referenced within the top header line of a node.  Try browsing a bit and
while in Info, display context-sensitive help for both the Action and Assist
Keys to see all that they can do.

If you click again with the Action Key on the right edge of the window
displaying Info, it will hide the Info buffer.  Thus, it works as a toggle to
display or to hide the Info buffer.  Isn't that easy?

A click of the Assist Key at the right edge of a modeline toggles between
display and removal of the Smart Key operation summary.  To remove the summary,
you must click on the modeline of the window displaying the summary.

*** Buffer Menu and Screen Control

An Action Key click in the center portion of a modeline displays a buffer
menu, a summary of available buffers.  An Action Key click on any buffer menu
line then displays that buffer.

An Assist Key click in the center portion of a modeline pops up a menu of
convenient screen commands that lets you select buffers grouped by major
mode, use HyControl, or jump to specific windows, window configurations or
frames.

See "(hyperbole)action-key-modeline-function" for how to adjust this
behavior.

* Epilog

We hope you have enjoyed this introduction to Hyperbole and see how it can
help you as an every-ready sidekick as you work with information every day.
Explore the Hyperbole menus to learn more interactively.  For reference, the
Hyperbole Manual has more detail about the many things that Hyperbole does
when you are ready to dive deeper.  Read it online with the GNU Info reader
at "(hyperbole)Top".


* References

[FSF 16] Free Software Foundation, Inc.  GNU Emacs Manual.  Free Software
Foundation, Cambridge: MA, 2016.  "(emacs)Top"

* THE END
